*Java—An Introduction*
Java is a simple, object oriented, high performance language. It is distributed, portable, multi-threaded, and interpreted—mainly intended for the development of object oriented, network based software for Internet applications. ‘Internet’ implies heterogeneous systems, different network features, different windows libraries, and different operating systems. Java guarantees identical program behavior on different platforms.

*A Brief History of Java*
In 1990, Sun Microsystems began a project called Green to develop software for consumer electronics. Developer, Gosling began writing software in C++ for embedding into such items as toasters, VCR’s, and Personal Digital Assistants (PDA’s). The embedded software makes many appliances more intelligent. Gosling’s solution to the problems of C++ was a new language called Oak. Finally in 1995, Oak was renamed Java. Since then Java has been rising in popularity.

*Bytecode*
The key that allows Java to solve both the security and the portability problems is that the output of a Java Compiler is not an executable code, rather it is a bytecode.

Bytecode is a highly optimized set of instructions designed to be executed by the Java runtime system, which is called the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). It is an interpreter for bytecode.

In the Java programming language, all source code is first written in plain text files ending with the .java extension. Those source files are then compiled into .class files by the javac compiler. A .class file does not contain code that is native to your processor; it instead contains bytecode—the language of the JVM.

The Java launcher tool then runs your application with an instance of the Java Virtual Machine.

The Java VM is available on many different operating systems, therefore the same .class files are capable of running on Microsoft Windows, the Solaris™ Operating System (Solaris OS), Linux, or Mac OS. Some virtual machines, such as the Java HotSpot Virtual Machine, perform additional steps at runtime such as finding performance bottlenecks and recompiling (to native code) frequently used sections of code.

*Java Versus C++*
Java is a true object oriented language while C++ is basically C with an object oriented extension. Listed below are some major C++ features that were intentionally omitted from Java, or significantly modified:

Java does not support operator overloading.
Java does not have template classes.
Java does not support multiple inheritance of classes.
Java does not support global variables.
Java does not use pointers.
Java has replaced the destructor function with the finalize() function.
There are no header files in Java.

*Applications of Java*
Java is being used in:

Real-time Systems
Simulation and Modelling
object oriented Databases
Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems
CIM/CAD/CAM Systems
Neural Networks and Parallel Programming
Decision Support Systems
Now that we have got an overview of the Java language, let us begin with the technicalities of the language.

